---
title: "The Mysteries of Life"
author: "Rene Dubos"
partNumber: 3
---

The Mysteries of Life
By Rene Dubos
We take for granted the existence of life on Earth. Yet, as and fauna become more or less stabilized under normal
far as we now know, life exists nowhere else in the solar conditions, and manage to reestablish stable ecosystems
system, its origin is still a mystery, and its effects on our after cataclysms; in our times they worry to what extent
planet have been little short of miraculous. Without life living things can be disturbed or eliminated by urbanization
the surface of the Earth and its atmosphere would be very and industrialization without thereby threatening human
different from what they are now. We are both spectators welfare.
and actors in a continuing performance where life is both But the phrase "life on Earth" also raises other questions
author and producer, and for which the Earth serves as an of a more philosophical character, questions that have been
ever-changing stage. in the minds of humble, uneducated people even before
Cataclysms give us now and then a glimpse of what they became the preoccupation of scholars. In the universe
our planet would look like without life. In 1883, a series at large, lifelessness is the rule, life the puzzling exception.
of stupendous volcanic eruptions destroyed two-thirds of How do living things differ from inanimate matter? How
Krakatoa Island in the Malay archipelago and covered did they originate? And can life be created de novo? Is man
what was left of it with a thick layer of lava. All living qualitatively different from the rest of the living world or
things were killed, not only on Krakatoa itself, but also merely a higher, or the highest, specimen in its evolution,
on the neighbouring islands that were in the path of the the paragon of animals?
tidal wave generated by the explosion and of the volcanic It is clear from the geological record that life has been at
fallout. What had once been a luscious tropical forest home on the Earth for immense periods of time. The types
suddenly became a gray and lifeless landscape, as desolate of fossils found in rock formations indicate that all major
as the surface of the Moon. groups of animals and plants were already represented
Pictures taken of Krakatoa in the months following the by recognizable ancestors some 400,000,000 years ago.
disaster help us to realize that what we regard as the Furthermore, microscopic structures closely related to the
surface of the Earth is less a geological structure than a present forms of blue-green algae have been found in
living mantle. Our planet would be drab and dusty, an geologic formations that are even very much older—some
insignificant object in space, if it were not for the myriad 3,000,000,000 years old. Since these fossils of algae-like
of living forms that have generated its atmosphere and organisms have a complex cellular organization, it can be
its soil out of gases and rocks. In fact, the phrase "life assumed that they had been preceded by simpler forms,
on Earth" is somewhat misleading because the surface of and that the origin of life is more ancient than the oldest
the Earth as we experience it, with its entrancing diversity traces of it which have been detected. In fact, there is no
and colourful warmth, is literally a product of biological way to know when life first appeared on Earth, because
activities—a creation of life. its earliest manifestations were certainly so minute, fragile,
Krakatoa remained a desolate landscape for a long time and undifferentiated that none of them have survived as
after the 1883 volcanic explosion. But progressively the fossils.
wind and the sea brought back to its sterilized surface a There is a peculiar fascination to the phrase "the origin
multiplicity of living things, some of which managed to of life" because it means different things to different men,
establish a permanent foothold on the lava. Today, the and reaches into the deepest layers of their beliefs. For the
island harbours once more a rich flora and fauna, not religious man, it implies the mysteries of divine creation—
very different from that of the native forest of the Malay whether expressed as biological species in their final forms,
archipelago. or as the potentialities posited by Aristotelian philosophers
There is a paradox in the marvelous resiliency of and medieval theologians. For the student of myths, it
nature. On the one hand, all individual forms of life are evokes Aphrodite emerging fully developed from the foam
extremely delicate. And yet life itself has been capable of the sea. The myth may have a factual basis if it is true,
of prevailing over brute physical forces for several billion as it is commonly believed, that the cradle of life was to
years, and has generated immensely diversified ecosystems be found in the primitive oceans. For the modern scientist
that have remained viable even under the most inhospitable the phrase "origin of life" refers to the kind of chemical
conditions. Life probably emerged from inanimate matter, reactions that first generated complex organic molecules
but it is now more powerful than inanimate matter. and assembled them in such a manner that they could
All biological phenomena are of practical importance duplicate themselves—thus converting inanimate matter
because they determine the characteristics of the Earth's into living substance.
surface and therefore affect the quality of human life. Men Whatever the mystical or rational basis of a person's
have always been concerned with the contributions that beliefs, there is a universal poetic quality in the thought
living things make to their immediate environment and that life once arose from matter, and has been perpetuating
to the global economy; they have wondered how the flora itself ever since. But the only real clue to the origin of life is
91

that all its forms—at least all the living things we know— produced by a living organism, and since its reassembled
have many physicochemical characteristics in common. parts showed activity only when introduced into a living
In particular, they all transfer their hereditary endowment susceptible organism, all the biological machinery essential
from one generation to the next through the agency of a for its reproduction had to be provided by preexisting life.
peculiar kind of molecule known as nucleic acid, the now In a completely unrelated kind of experiment, several
famous DNA. This uniformity of fundamental structure complex molecules similar to those found in living things
holds true irrespective of the size, shape, and complexity have been produced in the laboratory by exposing simple
of the organism—whether it be microbe, plant, animal, chemicals to the kind of radiation that probably existed in
or man. Indeed, the similarity in structure of the genetic the primitive atmosphere. But this chemical feat does not
apparatus throughout the living world is so perfect that constitute production of life de novo because the molecules
it cannot possibly be a matter of chance. The conclusion so produced have not been assembled—organized—in a
seems inescapable that all the living forms that now exist way enabling them to duplicate themselves and to develop.
have had a common origin. An organic molecule, however complex and similar to the
The simplest hypothesis to account for the origin and kind found in living things, still belongs to the realm of
evolution of life is that all biological phenomena are caused inanimate matter if it cannot reproduce and evolve.
by the physicochemical forces that govern the inanimate To become "living," an assembly of biogenic molecules
world. Some scientists believe, indeed, that there is nothing must contain the information needed for its further
very unusual in the emergence of a living molecule from development and must be able to transmit this information
matter. According to them, it is probable that life repeatedly to its progeny. Even in its simplest manifestations, life
emerged de novo on Earth and that it is still emerging is historical; it embodies the past and carries instructions
today somewhere in the cosmos. By making the reasonable for the future.
assumption that one of the living forms that appeared on More than a century ago, the French physiologist Claude
Earth proved more vigorous than the others, it is easy to Bernard gave a clear formulation of the now classical
account for the single origin of all surviving species. If view that the earmark of a living thing is not the
an entirely new genetic form of life were to appear today chemical composition of its parts but their organization.
on Earth, it would have no chance of success, because He wrote: "Admitting that vital phenomena rest upon
it could not compete with the established form and all physicochemical activities, which is the truth, the essence
its variations. of the problem is not thereby cleared up; for it is no
The hypothesis that life is nothing more than a special chance encounter of physico-chemical phenomena which
manifestation of ordinary physicochemical forces has the constructs each being according to a preexisting plan, and
merit of being economical of thought; in addition, it is produces the admirable subordination and the harmonious
supported by the fact that all biological phenomena go hand concert of organic activity.
in hand with the kind of reactions observed in the inanimate "There is an arrangement in the living being, a kind of
world. But even if we grant that living phenomena always regulated activity, which must never be neglected, because
obey physicochemical laws, this does not constitute decisive it is in truth the most striking characteristic of living
evidence that life is merely an expression of these laws. beings...."
Other theories are conceivable. One of them, rarely voiced In this celebrated passage, Bernard used the word
because it is not scientifically fashionable, is that some "arrangement" to denote the interdependence and
unknown principle runs like a continuous thread through integration of the structures and properties of any given
all living forms and governs the organizations of their living organism. But biological organization applies also to
physicochemical processes. The illustrious Danish physicist the ecological system of which the organism is a part. All
Niels Bohr, for example, suggested that "the very existence living things, without exception, depend on other living
of life must be considered an elementary fact, just as in things for their survival and development. Furthermore,
atomic physics the existence of a quantum of action has the higher the organism is on the evolutionary scale, the
to be taken as a basic fact that cannot be derived from more exacting is its dependence on a complex web of life.
ordinary mechanical physics." One of the major trends of evolution has thus been
Uncertainties concerning the fundamental nature of life the emergence of more and more complex ecosystems,
and its origin would disappear if it were possible to generate exhibiting high degrees of integration. But, paradoxically,
at will self-reproducing molecules from inert material. an opposite trend can also be detected as one ascends the
Some experimental findings have recently been quoted as evolutionary scale—namely, a trend toward freedom or
evidence of this possibility. at least toward increasing independence of the individual
A fully developed virus, which had been naturally organism within the constraints of the ecosystem. Freedom
produced by a living organism, was separated into its becomes more and more apparent as one proceeds
component parts by chemical procedures. When these from the protoplasmic jelly of biological beginnings to
separate parts were tested for biological activity, they were warm-blooded animals roaming in the wild, and finally to
found to be inert, that is, they were unable to multiply in a man who modifies his environment according to his views
susceptible organism. This biological activity was restored, of the future. In a real way, evolutionary development is
however, when the parts of the virus were chemically associated with the gradual insertion of more and more
reassembled in the test tube under the proper conditions. freedom into matter and into individual lives.
Spectacular as this achievement is from the chemical point In the Outline of Knowledge, Part Three, concerned
of view, it does not constitute—as has been claimed—the with life on Earth, is placed between Parts Two and
production of life de novo. Since the virus first had to be Four, concerned, respectively, with the Earth itself and

with human life. This positioning is reasonable enough, as mentioned above, the deterministic and blind chemical
but one could read into it an assumption that reaches reactions through which an organism—simple or complex
far deeper than the logical ordering of concepts and facts. as it may be—transmits its distinctive characteristics to its
The tacit assumption is that human life has emerged from descendants and reacts adaptively to its environment. At
the inanimate matter of the Earth through the same kind its highest, "life" involves man's consciousness and free
of evolutionary continuum that links all the other living will and refers to the deep reality of the world within and
forms in a great chain of being. In reality, however, the the affirmation of the individual self, irrespective of the
theory of evolution does not provide decisive evidence for external world.
this assumption. What is known of biological evolution There is no way at present to link these two extreme and
applies only to the anatomical structures and physiological apparently incompatible manifestations of life—biological
functions of organisms that have lived in the past or are determinism and human freedom. Yet both are real, and
living now. The successive steps from matter to life, and both have been immensely influential in giving the present
from life to consciousness, have not yet been shown to have characteristics to our planet.
taken place through the kind of mechanisms that account The surface of the Earth reflects the activities of countless
for the evolutionary changes of anatomical structures of living things. Even though these operate chiefly through
physiological functions. There exists a continuum from blind, deterministic mechanisms, life introduces on Earth
one form of life to another, but extending this continuum a degree of order, organization, and diversity not found
to inanimate matter on the one hand, and to human anywhere else in the cosmos, not even in the movement of
consciousness on the other, is a matter of faith rather than the celestial bodies. Man emerged, not on the bare planet,
of scientific knowledge. but in this orderly and diversified biological world. As soon
Even the most cursory observation of nature reveals as he achieved his identity as Homo sapiens, he began to
that all living forms are conditioned by environmental insert his free will into ecological determinism. For good
forces, and that reciprocally they shape the environment, or evil, he has now become the most powerful influence
thereby contributing to the triumph of life. But it must be in changing the face of the globe. His conscious choices
realized that the word "life" encompasses different kinds will determine not only his own fate, but also the fate of
of relations to nature. At its lowest level, "life" implies, life on Earth.

Several points about the relations of Part Three to other parts should be noted. The separation of Part
Three from Part One, on matter and energy, and from Part Two, on the Earth, reflects a traditional
division of labour among the natural sciences. However, the separation is not rigid. The borderline
disciplines of biophysics and biochemistry appear throughout Part Three, especially in Division II,
concerned with the molecular basis of vital processes. The effects of the Earth's atmosphere and
hydrosphere on living things are reflected throughout Part Three, especially in Division V, which is
concerned with the biosphere and with ecosystems.
Some fundamental biological knowledge of humans is involved in the treatment throughout Part
Three of what is common to all life and to all animals. And Section 355, the last section of Part Three,
deals with mankind's place and activities in the biosphere. However, what is specific to human life,
human health, and human behaviour is separately dealt with in Part Four, on human life.
The biological sciences have themselves been the object of historical and analytical studies. Such
studies are dealt with in Section 10/34 in Part Ten, which treats the historical development of the
biological sciences; the methodology, scope, and conceptual structure of biology as a whole; and the
several component disciplines at the different levels of biological research.
The design and operation of observational and experimental instruments are important in the devel-
opment of the biological sciences. Such scientific instrumentation is dealt with in Section 723 of Part
Seven.
