---
title: "Man the Social Animal"
author: "Harold D. Lasswell"
partNumber: 5
---

We are part of society when we share in comprehensive ing and retrieving information without relying exclusively
arrangements for living with one another and for managing on the memory of the old. Records and education multi-
the environment. The simplest societies are the primitive ply the number of learned professions. Urban civilization
bands who to this day live in jungles and deserts, and marks the emergence of such institutions as the territorial
on isolated mountains and beaches around the globe. The state, formal legislative codes of law, regular taxes, bureau-
most complex technological societies bind the world's cities cratized civil and military services, monumental public
together as part of an evolution that, barring catastrophe, works, complex systems of taxation, and official records.
is forming a planetary society of mankind. One way to bring out the degrees of likeness and dif-
Whether primitive or civilized, all societies must cope ference among societies, whether primitive or civilized, is
with the parallel problems that are generated by the urgen- to compare the priorities that are given to institutions of
cies of human nature and the necessities of a common life. the same kind. No one doubts that every society must
Arrangements are made for kinship and procreation; for concern itself to some extent with food. It is only in bands
safety, health, and comfort; for producing and consuming of the kind mentioned above that near-total preoccupation
commodities and services. Arrangements also develop la- with hunger deemphasizes, although without abolishing, all
tent talent into skills of communication, body movement, other interests. Where existence is less hard the accumu-
and environmental management. Institutions specialize in lation of wealth may become the principal value sought,
the gathering and dissemination of news and images of as among some merchant cities and trading tribes. War
the natural and social environment. Some institutions give and preparation for war may take top priority as it did
respect or disrespect to individuals and groups on a tem- for millennia among the shepherds of Inner Asia and the
porary or permanent basis, and distinguish between what river-valley agriculturalists who were conquered by herds-
is considered to be responsible or irresponsible conduct. men-warriors. Some agricultural societies emphasize wor-
Government, law, and politics seek to resolve the conflict- ship and encourage forms of knowledge, like astronomy,
ing demands that arise within or among communities. that enhance religion. In some societies, notably in East
At first glance we are less likely to be impressed by India, the accent is on ritual purity or impurity, and every
the parallels than by the differences among societies. The kin group is assigned a position in the respect system of
differences are conspicuous, if we consider, say, a horde caste and class.
of big-city commuters as compared with a band of tech- While priorities may remain stable for generations in a
nologically handicapped people who are continually in given society, this is not necessarily the case. At one time
search of the next meal. An anthropologist who lived with the peoples of Scandinavia were warriors and brigands.
such a band a few years ago in the rain forests of eastern Today we perceive them as among those who are most
Bolivia reported that apart from the hammocks they slept involved with the values of civil society. In the United
in, three-foot digging sticks, and cumbersome long bows States, the early colonizers of New England were heavily
and arrows, these naked seminomads carried no material oriented toward religion, morality, and political freedom.
objects with them. Modern urban dwellers usually feel More recently, the most general trend has been toward
some contempt for these bearers of an Old Stone Age secular activities, especially those connected with wealth.
culture and speculate on a possible weakness of the brain Throughout the contemporary world, "development" of-
to account for their lack of technological progress. Such ten carries the connotations of economic modernization,
speculations are dismissed by modern anthropologists as political independence, scientific education and research,
without foundation. As we get acquainted with primitive personal freedom, and social justice.
societies it dawns upon us that they have met some of the Besides allocating priorities, every society strikes a tem-
same problems that we have by adopting solutions whose porary or durable balance between the accumulation and
ingenuity equals or even excels our own. This may apply, the immediate enjoyment of every value. The modes of ac-
for instance, to arrangements for transmitting political au- cumulation depend on the value in question. Investment in
thority from one generation to the next, or for preventing wealth production, for instance, may involve adding fertil-
violently aggressive behaviour. izers to the soil, or building an infrastructure of roads and
Societies do indeed differ from one another in the degree bridges, or inculcating the values of saving and investment.
that they encourage specialization. In the simplest societies Expanded educational opportunity implies that more per
everybody does everything, with exceptions that are closely capita hours of teaching and learning, and more physical
linked to differences of sex and age. On the other hand, equipment, are made available, and that the importance of
many tribes use professional specialists, such as warriors, education is successfully communicated. If health oppor-
medicine men, blacksmiths, potters, weavers, musicians, tunities are to be multiplied, it is necessary to add facilities
and carvers. The world that we call civilized appeared with and to spread the practice of personal hygiene. A society
the invention of writing. Literacy provides a means of stor- cultivates public enlightenment with installations for scien-
169

tific and scholarly purposes, and for mass communication. contractual agreements or to seek redress of private wrongs.
Human relations improve as the roles of love, friendship, Nonetheless, the decision makers of the community are
and loyalty expand in "an era of good feeling," and as prepared to play a supervisory role by enforcing common
social discrimination wanes. Levels of responsible conduct norms if an unsettled private controversy is brought to
typically rise as opportunities become more available for their notice by the parties. Prescriptions also lay down the
worship and more people join in formulating and applying principles and procedures to be followed if the body politic
moral standards. During a given period the institutions organizes and administers a continuing enterprise, of which
of government, law, and politics sometimes accumulate services of transportation, communication, banking, insur-
more support. ance, and housing are examples. A legal system includes
The examples mentioned above refer to the "positive" correctional or sanctioning measures to obtain compliance
accumulation of a valued outcome. Accumulations may with prescribed norms. Value deprivations are imposed on
be "negative," as when disasters destroy property, spread those who have failed or are expected to fail to comply.
epidemics, or interfere with education. Deprivations range in severity from capital punishment,
All societies necessarily make arrangements for the shar- confiscation of property, or life imprisonment, to a light
ing of wealth, power, and other values. Among individu- fine or reprimand.
als and groups these arrangements exhibit all degrees of A legal system is stabilized when the effective elements
equality and inequality. Wealth and income are sometimes in society perceive themselves as relatively better off by
widely distributed. By contrast, they may be monopolized continuing the system than by adopting alternative arrange-
in the hands of a few. Political participation may be dis- ments. To some extent a legal order may exhibit cyclical
persed or concentrated. Opportunities may be equalized fluctuations, as when deviations are tolerated within limits
or monopolized for health, education, and information; or which, if exceeded, generate reform activities that restore
for respect, affection, and responsible conduct. the former situation with little change. In a capitalist
Characteristic of every society is the attempt to maintain economy "creeping monopoly" may invade trade unions,
itself by controlling the minds of young and old. People employers' associations, or natural resource and industrial
not only hunt or plow, trade or fight. They are also likely enterprises. In a socialist economy "black markets" may
to believe in what they do and how they do it. It is not introduce "creeping competition." In either case, cyclical
necessarily true that in a system of inequality those who movements may restore the original relationship before
occupy any particular station, however exalted or lowly, they have quietly stabilized a structural innovation, or pre-
entertain any doubts about the justification of the system. pared the way for violent revolutionary change.
A stable society carries on within the framework of a If the view is correct that worldwide interdependence is
common map of perception, belief, and identity. In such a increasing, the traditional blindfold of legal systems must
setting the individual learns from earliest infancy to think, be put aside long enough to give explicit consideration to
feel, and act in ways that bring positive rather than negative competing value goals and practices around the globe. In-
consequences from the social and natural environment. terdependence implies that whether they like it or not, the
Socialization is the process by which private motivations members of an emerging planetary society must take one
are channeled into acceptable public acts. another into account. Being taken into account implies that
In civilized societies reliance on the results of early beliefs, faiths, and loyalties, as well as overt behaviours,
education is heavily supplemented by government, law, are examined by public and private decision makers. The
and politics. The legal system is made up of several sets demand to be better informed about the social environ-
of authoritative and controlling prescriptions. One set is ment creates an enormous opportunity and responsibility
constitutive. It prescribes "who decides what and how." It for those who study society.
centralizes or decentralizes formal and effective power, and We expect anthropologists to provide us with knowledge
it separates power among agencies and groups. Structures of primitive societies and other specialists to focus on the
may be differentiated to plan, to promote, to legislate, to processes and institutions of civilized society. Political sci-
execute, or to review and appraise. Regulation defines the entists and legal scholars concentrate on government, law,
degree of protection given to the fundamental institutions and politics. Economists specialize in the production and
of every sector of society. Tradition alleges that a legal distribution of wealth. The role of educators is relatively
order is blind to values and practices that lie outside the clear. So, too, is the role of sociologists who concern them-
established beliefs, faiths, and loyalties ("ideologies") of selves with a sector of society, such as the family, social
the society with which it is involved. In consequence, le- class and caste, professions and occupations, communica-
gal systems may defend widely different balances between tion, public health, or comparative morals and religion.
value accumulation and enjoyment, and sharply contrast- Social scientists are continually under pressure to pro-
ing patterns of equality and inequality in the sharing of vide a map of the past and probable future impact of the
political power, wealth, respect, or any other value. The forces that shape society. They are asked, for instance, to
legal order may protect economic systems whose structures explain the causes of war and other forms of violence,
are capitalistic, socialistic, or cooperative; family systems and to suggest strategies that lead to "victory" in a specific
that permit one or more members of the sexes to marry conflict or to show how war itself may be eliminated as an
and raise children; religious faiths that exalt monotheism instrument of public policy. Social scientists are asked for
and polytheism; and so on through the infinite variety of explanations of why an economy experiences inflation, or
human practices. how it generates changing levels of employment and unem-
One set of prescriptive norms is supervisory. Individuals ployment. Specialists are expected to discover the sources
and groups may be given wide latitude to make private of alienation that separate young and old or threaten the

unity of a family, a school, a church, a political party, or side with professional sociologists, social psychologists, po-
a national state. These examples suggest the wide-ranging litical scientists, and other investigators. As a result, some
demands that confirm the importance of adding to our communities have learned to study themselves, assessing
knowledge of society. the degree to which they are involved in ethnic and other
We recognize the existence of a problem when we per- forms of discrimination. Unusual groups have joined in
ceive that our goals are inconsistent with one another or self-study. For instance, murderers and persons who have
when there are discrepancies between what we want and survived as targets of murderous assault have cooperated
what we have or expect. In public policymaking, the first in scientific research on the causes and consequences of
step is to answer the question, "Whose values are to be murder, and on possible strategies of prevention. Instead of
realized?" The social scientist who participates in tackling resenting the role of "guinea pig" in science, it is typical for
or solving a policy problem has an option: he may adopt those who choose to participate in programs of self-obser-
the criteria of a "client" or he may rely on his own values. vation to improve their individual insight while contribut-
The study of social institutions is sometimes affected by ing to the enhancement of society's stock of knowledge.
diverging norms of professional responsibility. No conflict Whether the client or the investigator is the source of
need arise if a social scientist is personally committed to a the value criteria adopted for a policy problem, questions
line of research that happens to be popular with influential of value priority are bound to arise. The relative impor-
members of the body politic. No anxiety or guilt is felt tance of political, economic, and other aims cannot be
if the findings are applied by current decision makers. A satisfactorily settled in programs of national or regional
frequent example is the study of administrative agencies development unless the full range of possible goals is con-
according to their "dollar efficiency" or according to the sidered. It is essential to take timing into account. When
accuracy and speed of communication between central of- a new nation-state first secedes from an empire, political
fices and field stations. power has top priority. The "ex-colony" tries to ensure its
In contrast to this harmonious relationship is the inner independence of external control, to obtain support from
and perhaps visible turmoil of social scientists whose re- outside powers, and to unify its people. Economic devel-
search interests are unacceptable to many members of the opment occupies a high priority position. Other targets,
current establishment. The researchers may want to study such as health, education, the expressive arts, and environ-
the effect of military expenditures on society. The problem mental protection, seem to be less urgent. The allocation
may be to find how a given level of military outlay mod- of manpower and facilities to various institutions depends
ifies the structure of the civilian economy and influences on the priority of the specific outcomes in which these
both the production and delivery of services specialized for institutions specialize.
health, education, public information, family welfare, and Social scientists have an indirect influence on priorities
other social outcomes. If the information gathered in the by asking questions about them, and also by presenting
course of a given project is classified as secret, no scientist a factual map of past trends, causes, and future contin-
can lawfully report his findings. Perhaps the investigator gencies. Scientists often devise small-scale pretests in order
will violate the letter of the law in the hope of mobilizing to try out solutions that may eventually be applied on
an effective demand for change. But it may be that such a larger scale.
a strategy will backfire. Instead of arousing community In adapting to the needs of this interdependent world,
protest against authority, the revelations may result in es- the scientists of society require of themselves that they
tablished leaders successfully taking advantage of an alleged measure the direction and intensity of the value demands
"breach of security" to suppress inquiry and discussion. of political, economic, ethnic, and all other identifiable
Another complication affecting the social investigator is groups anywhere on the globe. Acknowledging the perils
the degree of genuine consent that he must obtain from of a divided and militant world, the most compelling task
those whom he proposes to study. Physicians, surgeons, is to discern and make public the conditions under which
and biologists confront similar questions when they plan a world public order of government and law could become
to give a test, run an experiment, administer a drug, or a more perfect instrument of human dignity, security, and
perform an operation. Is it always necessary to explain to a welfare. Many small-scale programs show how to reduce
prospective subject the risks he will run? Is the investigator the human cost of transforming today's inadequate insti-
professionally or legally bound to make sure that the lan- tutions into more effective systems of communication and
guage of explanation can be understood by the individual organization.
concerned? If a social scientist plans to study the facts of For the first time in history it can be truly asserted
life in a prison or a mental hospital, should he reveal his that the scientists of society have been provided with tech-
purpose, even when it would be easier to gain confidence nological instruments of sufficient sophistication to assist
by posing as a fellow prisoner or a fellow patient? Similar in meeting the demands that are made upon them. Re-
issues rise in connection with field studies of primitive trieval and dissemination make it possible to map past,
tribes, of peasant communities, of foreign societies, and of present, and future events. Social analysts know that the
many other social settings. key question for the future is to resolve whether or not
In recent times, professional opinion has emphasized the spectacularly changing technology of knowledge, and
the importance of obtaining "shared participation" in the especially knowledge of society, will be in the hands of a
pursuit of knowledge. Many investigators willingly accept limited class or caste that seeks to serve its own advan-
the challenge of cultivating group demand for a project tage. The alternative is to share the control of information
and for a hand in data gathering and analysis. At every widely among all territorial and pluralistic groups. Unless
stage, arrangements are made for laymen to work side by individuals and groups are able to obtain access to corn-

prehensive stocks of information, they will be blind judges of a corporate enterprise can be made available to every-
of public policy. Without adequate access, their criticism one from the highest official to the humblest worker. The
will be dismissed as exercises in ignorance and bias. Critics salient facts can be made vivid, concise, and substantially
will be in no position to develop realistic alternatives to the accurate in images that may be supplemented in whatever
plans of governmental or private monopolists of knowl- detail is desired. The range of possible expenditures for any
edge. "Knowledge is power"; if there is to be self-control, political, economic, or social program can be summarized
there must be prompt and total access to information. and related to its potential impact on society.
The chief novelty about the computer and other techni- Human society has attained an unparalleled height of
cally advanced means of processing and transmitting infor- danger and opportunity. The study of society shares in
mation is that, in principle, everyone can be given prompt both. The unprecedented accumulation of knowledge en-
access to a selective "map of the whole." An image of the ables us to recognize that the scale of our problems is also
total deployment of man in space or of the total activities without precedent.

All studies of mankind take account of the effect of the social nature of humans. This is true of the
treatment in Part Four of human evolution, health, and general nature and behaviour. It is also true of
the treatments, in subsequent parts, of art, technology, religion, history, and the sciences and philosophy.
A special set of interrelated sciences, however, takes society and social behaviour as its direct subject
of inquiry. The outlines in the six divisions and the twenty-five sections of Part Five are concerned
with the complementary work of these social sciences.
The social sciences have themselves been the object of historical and analytical study. These studies
are presented in the articles referred to in Section 10/36 of Part Ten. The outline in that section
covers the history of the social sciences generally, and the nature, scope, methods, and interrelations of
anthropology, sociology, economics, and political science.
The social sciences have become increasingly interdependent and interpenetrating, and no regulative
agreement exists about how their distinction should be understood. Nevertheless, the diverse domains
are, in practice, distinguishable. The breakdown of Part Five into six divisions reflects the currently
operative distinction between cultural and social anthropology, the several branches of sociology, eco-
nomics, political science, jurisprudence and law, and educational philosophy and science.
